docs(tem): tutorial on configuring TEM's smtp relay (#1934)
scaleway/docs-content: tutorials/configure-smtp-relay-tem/index.mdx

---
meta:
  title: Configuring an SMTP relay with Transactional Email and Postfix
  description: This page shows you how to configure an SMTP relay with Transactional Email and Postfix
content:
  h1: Configuring an SMTP relay with Transactional Email and Postfix

>   paragraph: This page shows you how to configure an SMTP relay with Transactional Email and Postfix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  paragraph: This page shows you how to configure an SMTP relay with Transactional Email and Postfix
```

tags: smtp relay transactional-emails postfix send-emails
categories:
  - transactional-email
dates:
  validation: 2023-07-18
  posted: 2023-07-18
---

Installing an SMTP relay that sends messages from your servers allows you to be notified if/when there are problems, as the server tends to report them by email.

> This also means that if you have installed software on the server, the software can rely on the relay's SMTP rather than on configurations that are not always easy to handle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, this enables software installed on the server to use the SMTP relay instead of dealing with potentially complicated configurations for sending emails directly.
```

> In this tutorial, you will learn how to configure [Postfix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Postfix_(software)) and send emails via Transactional Email's SMTP. For the sake of this tutorial, we are using MacOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you will learn how to configure [Postfix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Postfix_(software)) and send emails via Transactional Email's SMTP service. For the sake of this tutorial, we are using MacOS.
```

<Macro id="iam-requirements" />
 
<Message type="requirement">
  - You have an account and are logged into the [Scaleway console](https://console.scaleway.com/)
  - You have [configured your domain with Transactional Email](/managed-services/transactional-email/how-to/configure-domain-with-transactional-email/)
  - You have configured and API key with the right permissions
  - You have [installed Postfix](https://ubuntu.com/server/docs/mail-postfix) on your local machine
  - You have [installed stunnel](https://www.stunnel.org/downloads.html) on your local machine
  - You have configured your SMTP server
</Message>

## Configuring Postfix with submission

> 1. Open a terminal and access the `sasl_passwd` file withing Postfix, using the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Open a terminal and access the `sasl_passwd` file within Postfix, using the following command:
```

    ```bash
    nano /etc/postfix/sasl_passwd
    ```
2. Copy and paste the following content into the `sasl_passwd` file.

    ```bash
    [smtp.tem.scw.cloud]:587 <$SCW_USERNAME>:<$SCW_SECRET_KEY>
    ```
3. Replace `<SCW_USERNAME>` with your username that displays in the **Overview** tab of your domain, in the SMTP configuration section.
4. Replace `<$SCW_SECRET_KEY>` with your API's secret key.
5. Type `CTRL O` and press `Enter` to save, then type `CTRL X` to exit the file.
6. Access the `main.cf` file to configure Postfix:
    ```bash

>     nano main.cf

Reviewer: full path missing here 
```suggestion
    nano /etc/postfix/main.cf
```

    ```bash
    smtpd_banner = $myhostname ESMTP $mail_name
    biff = no
    append_dot_mydomain = no
    myorigin = <your-domain-name>
    delay_warning_time = 4
    alias_maps = hash:/etc/aliases
    alias_database = hash:/etc/aliases
    mydestination = $myhostname, localhost.$mydomain, localhost
    smtp_sasl_auth_enable = yes
    smtp_sasl_password_maps = hash:/etc/postfix/sasl_passwd
    smtp_sasl_security_options = noanonymous
    smtp_use_tls = yes
    relayhost = [smtp.tem.scw.cloud]:587
    mynetworks = 127.0.0.0/8
    inet_interfaces = loopback-only
    smtpd_relay_restrictions = permit_mynetworks,defer_unauth_destination,reject
    ```
8. Type `CTRL O` and press `Enter` to save, then type `CTRL X` to exit the file.
9. Use the following command to launch Postmap:
    ```bash
    postmap /etc/postfix/sasl_passwd
    ```
    <Message type="tip">
     Depending on your configuration, you might need to use `sudo postmap /etc/postfix/sasl_passwd` to be able to launch Postmap.
    </Message>
10. Relaunch Postfix using the following command:
    ```bash

>     sudo postfix start

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    sudo postfix reload
```

    ```
11. Use the following command to send an email. Make sure that you replace `<your-domain>` with your own domain and `recipient@recipient.com` with your recipient's email address.
    ```bash

>     date | mail -s "Test from postfix" -a "From:<your-domain>" recipient@recipient.com

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    date | mail -s "Test from postfix" -a "From:<you@your-domain>" recipient@recipient.com
```

    ```

    <Message type="important">
    Keep in mind that the **subject**, **body** and **HTML** of your emails must have **at least 10 characters**.
    </Message>
12. Optionally, use `mailq` to see if your mail has been sent. An empty mail queue means that your email has been sent.

## Configuring Postfix without submission

> Some providers do not let you access port 587. To solve this issue, you can use the SMTPS port with Postfix. However, Postfix's relayhost option does not support SMTPS connections. So you will have to use stunnel to be able to use Postfix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some providers do not let you access port 587. To solve this issue, you can use the SMTPS port with Postfix. However, Postfix's relayhost option does not support SMTPS connections. A workaround is to use stunnel to be able to use Postfix.
```

1. Open a terminal and access the `smtp-wrapper.conf` file using the following command:
    ```bash
    nano /etc/stunnel/smtp-wrapper.conf
    ```
2. Copy the following configuration and paste it into the `smtp-wrapper.conf` file:
    ```bash
    [smtp-tls-wrapper]
    accept = 2465
    client = yes
    connect = smtp.tem.scw.cloud:2465
    ```
3. Type `CTRL O` and press `Enter` to save, then type `CTRL X` to exit the file.
4. Open a new terminal and access your `sasl_passwd` file within Postfix using the following command:
    ```bash
    nano /etc/postfix/sasl_passwd
    ```
5. Copy the following configuration and paste it in your file:
    ```bash

>     [localhost]:2465 <scw_access>:<scw_password>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [localhost]:2465 <$SCW_USERNAME>:<$SCW_SECRET_KEY>
```

    ```

> 6. Type `CTRL O` and press `Enter` to save, then type `CTRL X` to exit the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Replace `<SCW_USERNAME>` with your username that displays in the **Overview** tab of your domain, in the SMTP configuration section.
7. Replace `<$SCW_SECRET_KEY>` with your API's secret key.
8. Type `CTRL O` and press `Enter` to save, then type `CTRL X` to exit the file.
```

> 7. Access your `main.cf` file using the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9. Access your `main.cf` file using the following command:
```

    ```bash
    cd .. && nano main.cf
    ```
8. Replace `relayhost = [smtp.tem.scw.cloud]:587` with `relayhost = [localhost]:2465`.
9. Type `CTRL O` and press `Enter` to save, then type `CTRL X` to exit the file.
10. Use the following command to launch Postmap:
    ```bash
    postmap /etc/postfix/sasl_passwd
    ```
    <Message type="tip">
     Depending on your configuration, you might need to use `sudo postmap /etc/postfix/sasl_passwd` to be able to launch Postmap.
    </Message>
11. Relaunch Postfix using the following command:
    ```bash
    sudo postfix start
    ```
12. Use the following command to send an email. Make sure that you replace `<your-domain>` with your own domain and `recipient@recipient.com` with your recipient's email address.
    ```bash

>     date | mail -s "Test from postfix" -a "From:<your-domain>" recipient@recipient.com

Reviewer: From needs to be a email address - otherwise the mail get bounced
```suggestion
    date | mail -s "Test from postfix" -a "From:<you@your-domain>" recipient@recipient.com
```
